Redundant overdetermined2 (#3385)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/connectors.tex

connect(A, B)
\end{lstlisting}\end{synopsis}
\begin{semantics}

> Except for redundant connections it defines \firstuse{optional spanning-tree edge} from the overdetermined type or record instances in connector instance \lstinline!A! to the corresponding overdetermined type or record instances in connector instance \lstinline!B! for a virtual connection graph.

Reviewer: Missing _an_?
```suggestion
Except for redundant connections it defines an \firstuse{optional spanning-tree edge} from the overdetermined type or record instances in connector instance \lstinline!A! to the corresponding overdetermined type or record instances in connector instance \lstinline!B! for a virtual connection graph.
```

Reviewer: Can we further simplify the sentence by dropping _instance_ after _connector_?
```suggestion
Except for redundant connections it defines an \firstuse{optional spanning-tree edge} from the overdetermined type or record instances in connector \lstinline!A! to the corresponding overdetermined type or record instances in connector \lstinline!B! for a virtual connection graph.
```

\subsection{Generation of Connection Graph Equations}\label{generation-of-connection-graph-equations}

When generating connection graph equations, only the overdetermined components of a connector are considered.
The connection graph equations replace the equality-equations for variables that are neither flow nor stream in \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.

\subsubsection{Remove Redundant Connect-Equations}
In order to eliminate any redundant \lstinline!connect!-equation the following preparation is needed.
\begin{nonnormative}
In the common case where there are no redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations a \lstinline!connect! between connectors with \emph{one} overdetermined component will directly generate \emph{one} optional spanning-tree edge.
\end{nonnormative}
\begin{enumerate}
\item
  The connection sets are built similarly to the normal way, but keeping the overdetermined components as primitives.
\item
  Instead of generating the equality-equation for an overdetermined component, an optional spanning-tree edge in the virtual connection graph is constructed.

> \end{enumerate}

Reviewer: (Attaching comment to vacant line above where this actually belongs.)
It's not really possible to count redundant `connect`-equations like it's done below.  That there's an `connect`-equation redundancy of `m - (n - 1)` doesn't mean that exactly `m - (n - 1)` `connect`-equations can be identified as the redundant ones.  I think this can be resolved by talking about the _connect-equation redundancy_ instead.  I'll show with a series of detailed suggestions below…

Author: I understand that in general it doesn't follow, but apart from the fact that each connect-equation involves more than the overdetermined component, I don't see how there can be a connection-redundancy that cannot be (ambiguously) linked to specific connect-equations.

> If a connection set contains $n$ overdetermined components, and was built from $m$ \lstinline!connect!-equations, then $m-n-1$ of the \lstinline!connect!-equations are redundant.

Reviewer: Wrong difference:
```suggestion
If a connection set contains $n$ overdetermined components, and was built from $m$ \lstinline!connect!-equations, then $m-(n-1)$ of the \lstinline!connect!-equations are redundant.
```

Reviewer: In terms of redundancy:
```suggestion
If a connection set contains $n$ overdetermined components, and was built from $m$ \lstinline!connect!-equations, then the connection set has a \lstinline!connect!-equation redundancy of $m - (n - 1)$.
```

> If there are no redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations (i.e., if $m=n-1$), the optional spanning tree edges can be chosen to correspond to the \lstinline!connect!-equations for overdetermined connectors.

Reviewer: In terms of redundancy:
```suggestion
If there is no \lstinline!connect!-equation redundancy (i.e., if $m=n-1$), the optional spanning tree edges can be chosen to correspond to the \lstinline!connect!-equations for overdetermined connectors.
```

> If there are redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding optional spanning tree edge.

Reviewer: In terms of redundancy:
```suggestion
If there is a non-zero \lstinline!connect!-equation redundancy, there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding optional spanning-tree edge.
```

> \begin{nonnormative}

Reviewer: I would move the start of the non-normative part to right after the enumeration, so that everything that has to do with `connect`-equation redundancy is contained in the non-normative part.

Author: Ok.

> They are called redundant since if they were removed the same connection set and equations would be generated.

Reviewer: In terms of redundancy:
```suggestion
It is called \emph{redundancy} since this number \lstinline!connect!-equations could be removed without changing the connection set or the generated equations.
```

> Redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations include directly connecting a connector to itself, duplicated connections, and one connection among all of the pair-wise connections between \lstinline!a!, \lstinline!b!, and \lstinline!c!.

Reviewer: In terms of redundancy:
```suggestion
Situations with non-zero \lstinline!connect!-equation redundancy include connectors connected directly to themselves, duplicated connections, and three connectors with all three pair-wise connections.
```

  It is an error if two (or more) definite root nodes are connected through required spanning tree edges.
\item
  The virtual connection graph may consist of sets of subgraphs that are not connected together.
  Every subgraph in this set shall have at least one definite root node or one potential root node in a simulation model.
  If a graph of this set does not contain any definite root node, then one potential root node in this subgraph that has the lowest priority number is selected to be the root of that subgraph.
  The selection can be inquired in a class with function \lstinline!Connections.isRoot!, see table above.
\end{enumerate}
\item
  If there is a cycle among required spanning-tree-edges it is an error, as it is not possible to construct a spanning tree.
\item
  For a subgraph with $n$ selected roots, optional spanning-tree edges are removed such that the result is a set of $n$ spanning trees with the selected root nodes as roots.
\end{enumerate}

\subsubsection{Equations}
After this analysis, the \firstuse{connection graph equations}\index{connection equations!connection graph} are generated in the following way:
\begin{enumerate}
\item

>   For every optional spanning-tree edge in any of the spanning trees, the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.

Reviewer: Extra clarity:
```suggestion
  For every remaining optional spanning-tree edge in any of the spanning trees, the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.
```

Author: On this line I don't think that remaining is that helpful.
However, it makes it consistent with the ones that aren't in the spanning trees below.

>   For \lstinline!connect(A, B)! with overdetermined connector \lstinline!R! this corresponds to the edge \lstinline!A.R! to \lstinline!B.R! generating the equation \lstinline!A.R = B.R!.

Reviewer: Comma for easier parsing:
```suggestion
  For \lstinline!connect(A, B)! with overdetermined connector \lstinline!R!, this corresponds to the edge \lstinline!A.R! to \lstinline!B.R! generating the equation \lstinline!A.R = B.R!.
```

Reviewer: I guess one should also stick to the therm _optional spanning-tree edge_?
```suggestion
  For \lstinline!connect(A, B)! with overdetermined connector \lstinline!R!, this corresponds to the optional spanning-tree edge between \lstinline!A.R! and \lstinline!B.R! generating the equation \lstinline!A.R = B.R!.
```

\item

>   For every optional spanning-tree edge not in any of the spanning trees, the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}, except for overdetermined type or record instances \lstinline!R!.

Reviewer: Clarification, similar to above:
```suggestion
  For every remaining optional spanning-tree edge not in any of the spanning trees, the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}, except for overdetermined type or record instances \lstinline!R!.
```

\subsection{Generation of Connection Graph Equations}\label{generation-of-connection-graph-equations}

When generating connection graph equations, only the overdetermined components of a connector are considered.
The connection graph equations replace the equality-equations for variables that are neither flow nor stream in \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.

\subsubsection{Remove Redundant Connect-Equations}
In order to eliminate any redundant \lstinline!connect!-equation the following preparation is needed.
\begin{nonnormative}
In the common case where there are no redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations a \lstinline!connect! between connectors with \emph{one} overdetermined component will directly generate \emph{one} optional spanning-tree edge.
\end{nonnormative}
\begin{enumerate}
\item
  The connection sets are built similarly to the normal way, but keeping the overdetermined components as primitives.
\item

>   Instead of generating the equality-equation for an overdetermined component, an optional spanning-tree edge in the virtual connection graph is constructed.

Reviewer 2: I feel like this does not quite reflect what we discussed during the meeting: we consider connect equation redundant if it results in the same connection graph. Or at least, not as I understand it. Here is an example to discuss. Let's assume we have 4 connectors a, b, c, d that have some overdetermined types in them (R). Assume that we have:
```
Connections.root(a.R);
Connections.branch(a.R,b.R);
connect(a,b);
connect(a,c);
connect(a,d);
connect(b,c);
```
According to the rules above, we create a connection set based only on connect equations.
**Question one**: Shouldn't we include connectors connected by branches into the connection set as well? Assume, there was no connect(b,c) in that set. We have 4 connectors and 3 connect equations and they are all needed to form the same connection set, so no redundant connections. But then connect(a,b) is an optional edge in the graph but that is not in the tree, and we would need to generate the equalityConstraint for it. Should connect(a,b) be treated as redundant or should it generate this equalityConstraint?

We follow the rules above and construct the connection set based only on connect equations, we get: {a,b,c,d}. When we generate equality-equations for non-flow connectors, it doesn't matter what the original equations were since it is equality, so we are free to generate: a.t = b.t, b.t = c.t, c.t = d.t, assuming t is some non-flow, non-overdetermined type. The text above implies to me that we should follow the same logic for the overdetermined connectors but instead generate branches of the tree. So we could generate: [a.R,b.R], [b.R,c.R], [c.R,d.R].
**Question two**: Does it matter if I end up with an edge that doesn't correspond to any connect-equation like [c.R,d.R]?
The resulting equations would be: a.R = b.R (from the branch(...)), b.R = c.R, c.R = d.R, equalityConstrant(a.R,b.R). Is that correct?

**Question three**: Assume we had no branch(a.R,b.R). The connection set would be the same, the edges for the connection graph would be as before: [a.R,b.R], [b.R,c.R], [c.R,d.R]. But now there is no branch to define an additional unbreakable edge, so our graph is also a tree. The resulting equations would be a.R = b.R, b.R = c.R, c.R = d.R. No equalityConstraint needs to be introduced for connect(a,d). Is that correct?

This new formulation is very different from my previous understanding of how connections are elaborated. Maybe some differences do not matter at the end, because the end set of equations is equivalent, but I want to make sure that it is indeed so.

Author: I will have to consider whether the first two questions are relevant later; and/or whether we should guard against it in some way. But I don't think it should block this PR.

To me the two steps are separate (so that Connections.branch will not matter for the redundancy), and the model is almost guaranteed to fail.

The basic issue is that having both `connect(a, b)` and `Connections.branch(a.R, b.R)` doesn't make sense to me, since `Connections.branch(a.R, b.R)` should be used in combination with equations in the model (this is stated non-normatively in the chapter).

A typical case is Modelica.Mechanics.MultiBody.Parts.FixedTranslation where:
```
  Connections.branch(frame_a.R, frame_b.R);
  frame_b.r_0 = frame_a.r_0 + Modelica.Mechanics.MultiBody.Frames.resolve1(
    frame_a.R, r);
  frame_b.R = frame_a.R;
```
These three equations form an equationy unit linking `frame_a` to `frame_b`. Thus I don't see how we can also have a normal connect-equation between them inside the same model. (If they are connected from the outside, it would be more complicated.)

It's like having a block with:
```
  Modelica.Blocks.Interfaces.RealInput u;
  Modelica.Blocks.Interfaces.RealOutput Real y;
equation
  connect(u, y);
   y=k*u;
```
You can write some model like that that works - but I don't think it is good modeling.  (Well, just having `Real k;` and indirectly solving for it works.)

I see two solutions for these:
- Ignore it; as it is similar for normal connectors.
- Forbid having Connection.branch overlapping with connect inside one model; but I believe that can be a separate PR.

-
For the last question: yes, it would just be a tree without equalityConstraint.

\end{enumerate}
\begin{nonnormative}
If a connection set contains $n$ overdetermined components, and was built from $m$ \lstinline!connect!-equations, then the connection set has a \lstinline!connect!-equation redundancy of $m - (n - 1) \geq 0$.
If there is no \lstinline!connect!-equation redundancy (i.e., if $m=n-1$), the optional spanning-tree edges can be chosen to correspond to the \lstinline!connect!-equations for overdetermined connectors.
If there is a non-zero \lstinline!connect!-equation redundancy, there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding optional spanning-tree edge.

> It is called \emph{redundancy} since this number \lstinline!connect!-equations could be removed without changing the connection set or the generated equations.

Reviewer: Missing word:
```suggestion
It is called \emph{redundancy} since this number of \lstinline!connect!-equations could be removed without changing the connection set or the generated equations.
```

If there are no redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations (i.e., if $m=n-1$), the breakable branches can be chosen to correspond to the \lstinline!connect!-equations for overdetermined connectors.
If there are redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding breakable branch.
\begin{nonnormative}
They are called redundant since if they were removed the same connection set and equations would be generated.
Redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations include directly connecting a connector to itself, duplicated connections, and one connection among all of the pair-wise connections between \lstinline!a!, \lstinline!b!, and \lstinline!c!.
The latter case can be used to consistently handle conditional components (so that disabling \lstinline!b! does not break the connection between \lstinline!a! and \lstinline!c!).
\end{nonnormative}

\subsubsection{Spanning Trees}
Before connection equations are generated, the virtual connection graph is transformed into a set of spanning trees by removing optional spanning tree edges from the graph.

> This is performed in the following way:

Author: That would sort of invalidate the line before, and we would then have the last item dangling after the list in some way.

I would instead propose that we keep this line (alternatively just remove it) and change the enumeration list to a nested one as follows (the first line is new and correspond to this suggestion):
- Root nodes are selected as follows:
  - Every root node...
  - The virtual connection graph...
- For a subgraph...

> This is performed in the following way:

Author: That has now been implemented.

> This is performed in the following way:

Reviewer: OK.  Resolving.

\subsection{Generation of Connection Graph Equations}\label{generation-of-connection-graph-equations}

> Only the overdetermined connector components are considered.

Reviewer: Better way to start a section:
```suggestion
When generating connection graph equations, only the overdetermined components of a connector are considered.
```

> This generation replaces the equality-equation for variables that are neither flow nor stream in \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.

Reviewer: Better to talk about the resulting equations than "this generation":
```suggestion
The connection graph equations replace the equality-equations for variables that are neither flow nor stream in \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.
```

In order to handle any redundant connect-equation the following preparation is needed.
\begin{enumerate}
\item

>   We build the connection sets in the normal way, keeping the overdetermined components as primitives.

Reviewer 3: What about overdetermined record instances? They would not qualify as primitives by the definition in 9.2, but unless I'm missing something it seems like they need to be treated as such when building the virtual connection graph (or even the connection sets?).

Author: Yes, the idea is that they are included as primitives here. We might clarify that further.

>   We build the connection sets in the normal way, keeping the overdetermined components as primitives.

Reviewer: Better with "to", and avoid "we":
```suggestion
The connection sets are built similarly to the normal way, but keeping the overdetermined components as primitives.
```

\item

>   Instead of generating the equality-equation for an overdetermined component a breakable branch in the virtual connection graph is constructed.

Reviewer: Comma:
```suggestion
  Instead of generating the equality-equation for an overdetermined component, a breakable branch in the virtual connection graph is constructed.
```

\end{enumerate}

> If there are no redundant connect-equations the breakable branches will correspond to the connect-equations for overdetermined connectors, otherwise this will only generate branches for a subset of them.

Reviewer: This is not true.  The correspondence to `connect`-equations is only one of many possibilities for which equality-equations that could be generated for a normal connection set.

Also, missing styling of "`connection`-equation".

```suggestion
If there are no redundant connect-equations the breakable branches can be chosen to correspond to the \lstinline!connect!-equations for overdetermined connectors, otherwise this will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding breakable branch.
```

Author: The first part makes sense, the second less so.

Author: Have updated

Reviewer: I don't mind skipping the second part.  Resolving obsolete conversation.

\subsection{Generation of Connection Graph Equations}\label{generation-of-connection-graph-equations}

When generating connection graph equations, only the overdetermined components of a connector are considered.
The connection graph equations replace the equality-equations for variables that are neither flow nor stream in \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.

In order to handle any redundant connect-equation the following preparation is needed.
\begin{enumerate}
\item
The connection sets are built similarly to the normal way, but keeping the overdetermined components as primitives.
\item
  Instead of generating the equality-equation for an overdetermined component, a breakable branch in the virtual connection graph is constructed.
\end{enumerate}

> If there are no redundant connect-equations the breakable branches can be chosen to correspond to the connect-equations for overdetermined connectors.

Reviewer: Comma and styling:
```suggestion
If there are no redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations, the breakable branches can be chosen to correspond to the \lstinline!connect!-equations for overdetermined connectors.
```

> If there are redundant connect-equations there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding breakable branch

Author: I have tried to clarify it more.

> If there are redundant connect-equations there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding breakable branch

Author: The point about conditional components is that if `A`, `B` and `C` are all conditional then you might have, `connect(A, B); connect(A, C); connect(B, C);` If `A` is disabled you are left with `B` and `C `and `connect(B, C)` - which is ok (and symmetrically if just `B` or `C` are disabled), but if all are enabled then you have a redundant connection.
Clearly this is a bit esoteric.

> If there are redundant connect-equations there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding breakable branch

Reviewer 4: > Clearly this a bit esoteric

Not necessarily. We are going to use conditional components in PowerGrids, such a situation is not completely outlandish.

\end{enumerate}
If a connection set contains $n$ overdetermined components, and was built from $m$ \lstinline!connect!-equations, then $m-n-1$ of the \lstinline!connect!-equations are redundant.
If there are no redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations (i.e., if $m=n-1$), the breakable branches can be chosen to correspond to the \lstinline!connect!-equations for overdetermined connectors.
If there are redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations there will always exist \lstinline!connect!-equations without a corresponding breakable branch.
\begin{nonnormative}
They are called redundant since if they were removed the same connection set and equations would be generated.
Redundant \lstinline!connect!-equations include directly connecting a connector to itself, duplicated connections, and one connection among all of the pair-wise connections between \lstinline!a!, \lstinline!b!, and \lstinline!c!.
The latter case can be used to consistently handle conditional components (so that disabling \lstinline!b! does not break the connection between \lstinline!a! and \lstinline!c!).
\end{nonnormative}

> \subsubsection{Actual Generation of Connection Equations}

Reviewer: It would be good to not have a subsubsection named like this.  How about naming the two subsubsection `\subsubsection{Spanning Trees}` and `\subsection{Equations}`, and move the subsubsection split so that the first ends with:
> The virtual connection graph is finally transformed into a set of spanning trees by removing optional spanning tree edges from the graph.

Author: I couldn't find that exact text, and found it clearer to split the subsubsection into two.

> Before connection equations are generated, the virtual connection graph is then transformed into a set of spanning trees by removing optional spanning tree edges from the graph.

Reviewer: It sounds strange to say _Before … then_:
```suggestion
Before connection equations are generated, the virtual connection graph is transformed into a set of spanning trees by removing optional spanning tree edges from the graph.
```

>   If there are n selected roots in a subgraph, then optional spanning-tree edges have to be removed such that the result shall be a set of n spanning trees with the selected root nodes as roots.

Reviewer: Missing math style, and avoid saying _if_ for something which isn't a condition:
```suggestion
  For a subgraph with $n$ selected roots, optional spanning-tree edges are removed such that the result is a set of $n$ spanning trees with the selected root nodes as roots.
```

After this analysis, the \firstuse{connection graph equations}\index{connection equations!connection graph} are generated in the following way:
\begin{enumerate}
\item

>   For every optional spanning-tree edge (for \lstinline!connect(A, B)! with overdetermined connector \lstinline!R! this corresponds to the edge \lstinline!A.R! to \lstinline!B.R!), in one of the spanning trees, the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.

Reviewer: Avoid making it sound like just one of the spanning trees should be used:
```suggestion
  For every optional spanning-tree edge (for \lstinline!connect(A, B)! with overdetermined connector \lstinline!R! this corresponds to the edge \lstinline!A.R! to \lstinline!B.R!), in each of the spanning trees, the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.
```

Author: I find that harder to read, and I think both variants are more complicated than necessary - and the underlying problem is that the parenthesis is disrupting the structure.
I would thus prefer something like:

`For every optional spanning-tree edge that belongs to a spanning tree (for \lstinline!connect(A, B)! with overdetermined connector \lstinline!R! this corresponds to the edge \lstinline!A.R! to \lstinline!B.R!), the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.`
(Or possibly "any spanning tree".)

Author: Looking more I believe that "any spanning tree" is the best, as it corresponds to the next item. I will propose the specific text.

Author: Specifically:
```suggestion
  For every optional spanning-tree edge in any of the spanning trees, the connection equations are generated according to \cref{generation-of-connection-equations}.
  For \lstinline!connect(A, B)! with overdetermined connector \lstinline!R! this corresponds to the edge \lstinline!A.R! to \lstinline!B.R! generating the equation \lstinelin!A.R = B.R!.
```
This makes it closer to the next item.

Reviewer: Sure, let's do that.

  \begin{center}
    \includegraphics{overdetermined}
  \end{center}

>   \caption{Example of a virtual connection graph. Breakable branches refer to optional spanning-tree edges, and nonbreakable to required spanning-tree edges.}

Reviewer: Line breaks:
```suggestion
  \caption{%
  Example of a virtual connection graph.
  Breakable branches refer to optional spanning-tree edges, and nonbreakable to required spanning-tree edges.
   }
```
